Interview with Michael Collins coming in 3, 2, 1. My guest today is Michael
Collins, who was the command module pilot on Apollo 11, that historic flight 15
years ago when man first walked on the surface of the moon. Mr. Collins, when
did you join the space program? I joined the space program in January of 1964,
slightly over 20 years ago, although it doesn't seem that long. What was going
on in the space program at the time, and why were you motivated to go into it?
Well, I joined right after Mercury and before Gemini, and that was in the days
when NASA was looking for test pilots to be astronauts, and I was a test pilot
out at Edwards Air Force Base, California, and the idea of working for NASA and
flying a little higher and a little faster was very appealing to me. What was it
like then to be an astronaut? They were very busy and they were very exciting
times. I was in the third group of astronauts. There first was a group of seven,
then a group of nine, and then the third group of 14, making a total of 30
people. So we were small enough that we knew each other all very well, and we
were working together very well as a team, and we were spending most of our time
in the early days looking at the design of the Gemini and the design of the
Apollo to make sure that they made sense from the pilot's point of view, the
people who were going to be operating that very complicated equipment. We had
more to do than there were hours in the day. It was very busy. We were doing a
lot of traveling. It was a very interesting and exciting time. You flew on one
of the Gemini missions, right? Could you describe that? Yes, I flew with John
Young on Gemini 10 in July of 1966, and it was a three-day flight designed
primarily to check out the practicality of various rendezvous procedures. We had
an Agena launched a couple of hours before us, and we took off from Cape Kennedy
and found the Agena in the sky and rendezvoused and docked with it, and then we
used its power, its engine, to boost us up into a higher orbit where we found a
second Agena, one that had been up there for several months and was electrically
dead, an inert Agena, and we made a rendezvous with it using entirely optical
techniques. In other words, it didn't have any capability of responding to our
radar, so we made two rendezvous, one using radar with our own Agena and one
without radar on this inert Agena, and then I made a spacewalk over to the
second Agena and retrieved from it a scientific package, which we returned to
the Gemini and then subsequently back to Earth. It was a very, very busy flight.
We really had more to do in three days than we could shoehorn in, and it was
very exciting. How do you compare spacewalking then to spacewalking now? For
example, the spacewalks that were conducted by Bruce McCandless and Pinky Nelson
in previous space shuttle missions when they used the man-maneuvering units.
Well, our equipment was not nearly as fancy or good or complicated as the
equipment they have now. We didn't know as many things. For example, instead of
that gigantic backpack, which McCandless wore, I had a small handheld gun-like
device which squirted out little jets of cold gas. The difference is I had to
point it in precisely the right direction or I would miss my target or I would
start, if I didn't hold it in proper alignment with my body, I would start
tumbling in the McCandless equipment. There are gyroscopes and automatic devices
to prevent those things. So ours was very crude and rudimentary compared to the
equipment they have now. Of course, ours was also a lot smaller, which it had to
be on the Gemini because it itself was a very small machine. Would you like to
spacewalk now with all this new technology? Oh, I would. I'd love to, yes. I
think that would be wonderful.
The backpack is almost a miniature spacecraft itself and I think it would be a
great deal of fun to motor scooter around the sky in the vicinity of the shuttle
and I'd love to do that. Let's go back to the Gemini program. Well, the Gemini
program was a very nice program. It's not well remembered today because it fell
in the shadow of Apollo, but we really could not have had Apollo or Apollo could
not have been as successful as it was had there not been a Gemini program.
Gemini was required really to do three things. The first thing was to prove that
rendezvous and docking in space was practical because the Apollo scheme required
that the Apollo spaceship break itself into two pieces, one piece to land on the
moon, the second piece to remain in lunar orbit. For this scheme to be
successful, it was necessary that we have a safe and a practical rendezvous, a
procedure for bringing these two pieces back together. The second was to prove
that you could stay in space for long enough in weightlessness to make the trip
from the earth to the moon and back again without any deleterious effect on the
human body. And then the third thing was if you are going to go land on the
moon, you have to operate outside on the surface independent of the vehicle
itself. And Gemini was designed to give us some experience in extravehicular
operations or spacewalking. Then those three things, rendezvous, long duration,
and extravehicular activities were the main reasons for Gemini's being. And it
did prove that all three of those things were practical. And it led then very
logically into Apollo. After Gemini, you began working in the Apollo program and
you became a specialist in the command module part of the Apollo equipment. What
happened then? I was assigned to Apollo 11, the first lunar landing flight. It
was preceded by Apollo 7, 8, 9, and 10. 7 was a flight in earth orbit to prove
that the command module was airworthy. 8 took the command module all the way to
the moon. 9 was back in earth orbit and introduced the lunar module along with
the command module. 10 then took the lunar and command modules to the moon in a
dress rehearsal. And then 11 was the first lunar landing flight. So you can see
we moved fairly quickly. Once we got into Apollo, we didn't waste much time in
landing. We just had four preliminary flights and we could not have moved that
rapidly had we not built up a strong foundation of experience on the Gemini
program. Apollo 11 was a very exciting flight. It was, although it was followed
by a number of other flights in many of our minds, it was sort of the
culmination or the apex or the apogee of the Apollo program because President
Kennedy had said that before the end of the decade, we were to land a man on the
moon and return him safely to earth. And on Apollo 11, we did that even double.
We landed two men on the moon and returned them safely to earth. So we felt that
we were fulfilling the presidential mandate and there was great attention and
pressure brought to bear on us as the crew of Apollo 11. What was the historical
value of Apollo 11? One effect, I think, of the first lunar landing was to bring
people of all nations closer together. For example, after the flight of Apollo
11, we three crew members took a very quick trip around the world. We visited,
if I recall correctly, some 22 countries in slightly over a month's time. And we
noticed that everywhere we went, no matter what the country, no matter what its
politics, the people there seemed to identify very closely with us and with the
Apollo program. They felt indeed a part of it. They felt part of humankind's
first step out onto the surface of another planet. And I think that flight of
Apollo 11 did make the world a little bit smaller and a little bit friendlier
and did give it a feeling of unity that had not existed before. Do you think it
was worthwhile going to the moon? Yes, I definitely think going to the moon was
worth it. It's difficult to put numbers on things. The Apollo program costs
around $24 billion, which is a huge amount of money. There have been studies run
which suggest that for every dollar you spend in the space program, there is a
fallout or a spin-off of several dollars of beneficial effects throughout our
economy. People trace miniaturization, advances in electronics, the use of
exotic new materials, and a host of allied advances to the space program. I feel
that the space program is paying for itself, and I feel that the lunar landing
was especially useful because I feel, I believe, that eventually we're going to
leave this planet and we're going to go out through the universe, and we're
going to have, in the long run, a choice of either living here or living
somewhere else. And if you believe that, then you have to get started on that
venture somewhere along the line, and taking that small step from Earth to Moon
is a necessary part of that to be followed by a little bit longer step to Mars
and then perhaps to Titan, one of the satellites of Saturn, and on we go from
there. Do you think we ought to go back to the Moon? I think there will be good
reasons for going back to the Moon, and in time astronomers would love to go to
the Moon. If they could get over on the backside of the Moon, they wouldn't have
any interference from all the electromagnetic noise that we make here on Earth,
and any information they received from the stars would be pure, unfiltered
information. and they'd love to put up a transparent dome on the far side of the
Moon and quietly listen to what the universe is trying to tell us. In similar
fashion, people would like to mine the Moon. It's very rich in heavy elements
such as titanium. Others would like to use those lunar materials to create a
miniature planet, a gigantic space station somewhere between the Earth and the
Moon. Personally, if I were designing a program of exploration, I would rather
go learn a little bit more about Mars before I would return to the Moon. In
fact, in your book, Carrying the Fire, you mentioned something about hoping man
would visit Mars in your lifetime, and you call that magic. So you still feel
that way? Personally, I think there's a lot more to be learned by human beings
prowling around the surface of Mars. One Viking landing is like aliens
sending one probe to Earth, and it lands in the middle of the Mojave Desert, and
therefore those people think they know all there is to know about Earth. They
think it's homogeneously like the Mojave Desert. So I think there's a lot to be
learned by prowling around other regions on Mars and developing the capability
for people to fly off on a long voyage. Mars would be about close to a two-year
trip. It's a, you know, that's right. It's about nine months minimum one way,
and then if you want to spend any time there, the first thing you know is you've
almost used up two years. I've always thought I wanted to go to Mars. From the
time I was a little kid, I wanted to go to Mars. I was never that interested in
the Moon, but I always wanted to go to Mars. And then you ended up going to the
Moon instead. Yes, I got the wrong planet. Ended up with the Moon instead of
Mars. What do you think of the progress made in the space program today? Do you
think we're going in the right direction? I think the shuttle is a wonderful
machine. The design of the shuttle is an excellent one, and it's performing
magnificently, and I think it leads logically into a permanent station in Earth
orbit. So you are in favor of building the manned space station? Oh, yes, yes. I
think it's a necessary step, and I think it's one that will probably pay its own
way. We're already discovering that there are certain advantages to
weightlessness. We can purify pharmaceutical products. We can manufacture
perfect spheres of different materials, and already we're discovering practical
ways of using weightlessness. And I think when we get a station that's able to
stay up in Earth orbit indefinitely, that those ways will multiply. Let's go
back to Apollo 11. How did you get to the Moon? Could you describe that? When
it's about a quarter of a million miles away, and it takes about three days to
get there, you leave Cape Kennedy and northeastern Florida, and in 10 or 11
minutes you find yourself in orbit around the Earth. You stay in orbit around
the Earth for a couple of hours to make sure that all your equipment is
functioning properly, and then you reignite your rocket engine, and you speed up
to around 25,000 miles an hour, which is the speed required to break the bond of
Earth's gravity. That then puts you on a trajectory which you hope will cause
you barely to miss the Moon, some three days later. And during those three days
you're navigating, you're talking to people back on Earth who have very powerful
radar sets, and you make sure that you're going right down the center line of
that imaginary highway, and if you're not you make some small corrections with
your rocket engine to stay on the proper course. Then when you arrive at the
Moon, you just miss it a little bit. You go right ahead of it by about 60 miles,
and as you skim by it, you ignite your engine again and you slow down so that
the Earth's or the Moon's gravity is now able to capture you, and after a little
correction or two, you find yourself in a circular orbit about 60 miles above
the surface of the Moon. You spend a day there and make sure everything is
working right, and then the lunar module separates from the command module, and
the lunar module with two people on board, in this case Neil Armstrong and Buzz
Aldrin, descend rather leisurely and break to a halt and land while you whiz by
overhead. Then they proceed to explore the surface of the Moon for a couple of
hours, get a little sleep, come on back, launch from the Moon, and find you as
you go by overhead. Once the two of you are docked, the lunar module is
jettisoned and allowed to remain in orbit, and then you use the command module
engine to break the bond of lunar gravity, and again get yourself on a
trajectory which will cause you to head back to Earth, and to just barely graze
the atmosphere of the Earth, come coasting in at a shallow angle, and get
captured by Earth's gravity, and as the friction of hitting the atmosphere
increases, the spacecraft slows down, and eventually you open your parachutes
and plop into the ocean some eight days after you began, and that's how you go
to the Moon, and that's what we did on Apollo 11. What were your feelings when
Armstrong was making that first step on the Moon, and what were you thinking
about when you were there all alone in the command module with the Moon between
you and everybody else? My concerns were really not for me and what was going on
inside the command module, but I was concerned about what might happen to
Armstrong and Aldrin on the surface of the Moon, and then even more than that, I
was concerned about their ability to come back up in rendezvous and find me. The
rendezvous procedure is a fairly complicated one when everything is working
exactly right, and if things start breaking, if the radar doesn't work properly
or something else happens, if they get off late, there are a number of
variations on the theme which then ensue, and these can be extraordinarily
complicated. So I was mostly concerned about rendezvous. When I heard that they
were out on the surface, that made me really feel good. I had a feeling of
shared pride, just as the people here on Earth did, that everything seemed to be
going very successfully, but I still in the back of my mind had a nagging fear
about the rendezvous and the docking. As far as my being alone, as I said
before, I rather enjoyed that, and I didn't have any concerns about that. It was
a fun feeling to be over on the backside of the Moon all by myself, knowing I
was the only human in that part of the universe. Over on the other side there
were three billion plus two, three billion on that funny little blue blob that I
could see when I swung around onto the front side, and then two down below me.
But when I was over on the rear of the Moon, I had the whole universe to myself,
and I rather enjoyed that feeling. This concludes our interview for today with
Michael Collins, Command Module Pilot on Apollo 11.